Man: OK. YOUR
BANK CARD IS
IN THERE.
ALL YOUR
INSTRUCTIONS
ARE IN THERE, OK?
ALL RIGHT.
THERE'S YOUR
PAPERWORK,
AND THERE'S YOUR
SAFE SEX KIT.
GOOD LUCK TO YOU.
THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT.
[BUZZ]
WHOO.
WHAT DID YOU COME
UP FOR THIS TIME?
D.C.S., DELIVERY
OF A CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCE.
THAT'S WHAT
I THOUGHT. OK.
THAT'S WHAT I
THOUGHT IT WAS.
WE'RE GONNA GO
OVER HERE.
OOH.
SO HOW YOU FEEL
GETTING OUT OF THERE?
PRETTY GOOD.
HOW MANY MONTHS
WAS IT?
HUH?
HOW MANY MONTHS?
UH, I WAS SENTENCED
TO 41 MONTHS.
41? WHOA.
Man, voice-over:
YOU KNOW, IN THE PAST,
I WAS KIND OF AMBIVALENT
AS TOWARDS MY CHANCES
OF STAYING OUT.
I HAD GOOD INTENTIONS,
BUT I JUST DIDN'T--
I JUST DIDN'T FEEL
IT IN HERE.
THIS TIME AROUND,
I'VE REGAINED
A POSITIVE SELF-IMAGE,
AND SO WHAT HAPPENS
IN MY LIFE REALLY
DOES MATTER TO ME.
YOU KNOW, THAT MAY SOUND
KIND OF SIMPLISTIC,
BUT, YOU KNOW, NOBODY
SAID SUCCESS HAS
TO BE COMPLICATED.
MY NAME IS
MARQUITA SCOTT.
I'M A PAROLE/PROBATION
OFFICER FOR MULTNOMAH COUNTY
FOR THE AFRICAN AMERICAN
PROGRAM.
THIS IS NATHANIEL ROBERTS.
HE'S ALSO A PAROLE/PROBATION
OFFICER,
AND THIS IS THANH VU,
ALSO KNOWN AS NATE.
HE'S A CORRECTIONS
COUNSELOR.
DO YOU WANT TO DO
THE INTRODUCTION
AS TO WHAT
THE AFRICAN AMERICAN
PROGRAM IS?
ACTUALLY, THEY ALL
SHOULD KNOW.
YOU GUYS KNOW WHAT
THE AFRICAN AMERICAN
PROGRAM IS ALL ABOUT?
YOU GUYS HAVE
ANY QUESTIONS?
SOME OF YOU GUYS DO.
I KNOW. I'VE MET
SOME OF YOU GUYS.
WHAT I KNOW
ABOUT IS
YOU GUYS
HELP US GET BACK
INTO THE COMMUNITY
THAT WE FELL OUT OF
AND HELP US MAKE
SURE THAT WE
GET JOBS,
WE HAVE HOUSING.
THIS AFRO AMERICAN
PROGRAM HELP, TOO,
BECAUSE IT HELPS
YOU WITH YOUR
FAMILY, TOO.
BECAUSE, YOU KNOW,
A LOT OF PEOPLE
HAVE BEEN DOWN,
AND A LOT OF PEOPLE
HAVE BEEN AWAY
FROM THEIR FAMILY,
AND, LIKE, NOW--
AS YOU SEE NOW,
THEY GOT US
WAY OUT HERE,
AND WE'RE FAR AWAY
FROM OUR FAMILY NOW.
I WANT THIS PROGRAM
BECAUSE, LIKE I SAY,
YOU KNOW, I'M PART
OF THE COMMUNITY,
AND I WANT TO
GET BACK INTO
THE COMMUNITY,
AND I DON'T WANT TO
DEAL WITH THIS
NO MORE.
LIKE I SAY, I WAS
OUT FOR 10 YEARS.
I'M NOT TRYING
TO COME BACK
WHEN I GET OUT.
WE CARE ABOUT YOU
NOT COMING BACK TO PRISON
OR GOING TO JAIL
OR VIOLATING YOU,
SO IF YOU GOT PROBLEMS,
YOU CAN COME TO YOUR P.O.
WHEN BEFORE YOU PROBABLY
THOUGHT, "I CAN'T GO
TO MY P.O. AND SAY
"I'M USING,
I NEED TO GO
TO DRUG TREATMENT,
BECAUSE IF I DO
THEN I'M GOING TO JAIL."
Roberts: HOW MANY
GUYS IN HERE
HAS BEEN IN HERE
MORE THAN ONCE,
BEEN IN PRISON
MORE THAN ONCE?
SHOW OF HANDS.
MORE THAN ONCE,
MORE THAN ONCE.
YOU WANT TO
COME BACK HERE
AGAIN EVER?
IT SEEMS LIKE
A DUMB QUESTION,
BUT IT'S FUNNY--
IT'S REAL, THOUGH.
YEAH. IT'S REAL REAL
BECAUSE YOU KNOW WHAT?
FIRST THING YOU
SAY WHEN YOU GET
OUT OF HERE,
"MAN, I AIN'T
NEVER COMING BACK
TO THAT PLACE.
IT'S A PIT.
I AIN'T NEVER
GOING BACK THERE."
YOU WILL BITE
YOUR TONGUE
AND EAT YOUR WORDS
WHEN YOU WALK
OUT OF HERE
AND YOU'RE THINKING
THE SAME WAY
AND ACTING
YOU ACTED
PRIOR TO GETTING
IN HERE.
SOME OF THE PEOPLE THAT
ARE HERE NEED TO BE HERE,
BUT THERE ARE SOME THAT ARE HERE
THAT NEED SOME SUPPORT,
SOME EDUCATION,
AND SOME DIRECTION.
WE TALK ABOUT CORRECTION
AND REHABILITATION,
AND COMING FROM SOME COMMUNITIES
AND SOME SOCIETIES,
SOME PEOPLE HAVE
NEVER BEE HABILITATED,
SO HOW CAN YOU
REHABILITATE THEM?
SO WE HAVE TO GET INTO ACTUALLY
TRAINING A YOUNG MAN
ON HOW TO BE YOUNG MAN,
AND THAT GOES
ACROSS THE CULTURAL LINES.
YOU KNOW, SOME OF THESE GUYS
JUST DON'T HAVE ANY GUIDANCE.
RANDY WEST.
ABOUT 28 DAYS
TO THE DOOR,
YOU KNOW WHAT I MEAN?
IT'S BEEN A LONG
TIME COMING.
I'VE BEEN ANXIOUS
EVER SINCE I GOT HERE,
SO, YOU KNOW
WHAT I MEAN?
HEH HEH HEH!
I HEARD THAT.
SO IT'S A FEELING,
YOU KNOW WHAT I MEAN?
YOU GO THROUGH
A LOT OF DIFFERENT
EMOTIONS
WHEN YOU'RE GETTING
CLOSE TO THE DOOR.
IT'S A LOT OF QUESTIONS
AND REQUESTIONS
AND MORE QUESTIONS
THAT YOU GOT ASK YOURSELF
TO MAKE SURE THAT
YOU'RE PREPARED
AND READY TO GO FACE
THE REAL--TO GO
FACE THE WORLD, SO...
Vu: HOW LONG
YOU BEEN DOWN?
I'VE BEEN DOWN
16 YEARS,
SO I CAN SAY THAT I
PROBABLY DID THE MOST TIME
OUT OF ALL OF US
IN HERE,
AND SO, YOU KNOW,
I'M JUST GETTING PREPARED,
READY TO GO OUT THERE
AND FACE IT.
I HAVE TO BE CONSCIOUS
OF MY FRIENDS.
OF THE PEOPLE I COME
IN CONTACT WITH.
IT'S A LOT OF VARIABLES
OUT THERE THAT YOU HAVE
TO REALLY WATCH OUT FOR
BECAUSE YOU KNOW WHAT'S
BEHIND YOU.
BEHIND YOU IS YOU GOING
RIGHT BACK THROUGH
THOSE SAME DOORS
THAT YOU WENT
THROUGH BEFORE,
AND THERE'S A PRISON BED
WAITING FOR YOU.
Vu: RANDY HAS TWO CHOICES
IN LIFE WHEN HE WALKS OUT.
FIRST OF ALL, HE'S A LIFER,
SO THE PAROLE BOARD'S GONNA BE
LOOKING AT HIM VERY SERIOUSLY.
IF HE SCREWS UP,
THEY CAN YANK HIS CHAIN
AND BRING HIM BACK
FOR THE REMAINDER
OF HIS LIFE.
Man: SEEING YOURSELF
GET THROUGH THE FINISH LINE.
MY NAME IS CALVIN HARPER.
I GOT TWO MORE MEETINGS LEFT,
AND I'LL BE OUT,
AND I'M DOING OK.
I'M GETTING ANXIOUS
I'M GETTING RELEASED,
BUT I'M DOING OK.
24 MONTHS IS UP.
I GOT 3 WEEKS LEFT
BEFORE I GET OUT
THE FRONT DOOR,
AND LIKE I SAY,
I CAN'T WAIT.
I'VE BEEN COMING
TO YOUR OFFICE
FOR HOW LONG, A YEAR?
AND THIS IS
THE FIRST TIME--
I HAVE BEEN SCAMMING YOU,
BUT I'M NOT GONNA SCAM
YOU NO MORE.
HAVE YOU BEEN
DRINKING TODAY?
TODAY? NO.
I CAN'T TELL A LIE. NO.
LAST NIGHT,
IF YOU'D HAVE
CAME TO THE HOUSE,
BOY, YOU'D HAVE HAD A--
YEAH. I WOULD HAVE HAD
A BOTTLE ON THE TABLE.
NOW. HAVE I EVER COME
CLEAN TO YOU THIS WAY?
YES OR NO?
TELL THE TRUTH.
TO BE HONEST
WITH YOU,
YOU HAVEN'T EVEN
COME TO MY OFFICE
THIS WAY.
OK. YOU GOT ME.
I'D LIKE
A CRITIQUE OF THIS.
WHAT COULD HE HAVE
DONE BETTER COMING
TO THE OFFICE?
NOT LYING?
NOT LYING.
GETTING CAUGHT
LYING.
LET ME ASK YOU
SOMETHING.
PRIOR TO THIS
WHOLE PIECE,
YOU CAME IN
WITH A CON
ATTITUDE.
YOU WANTED TO
GET OUT.
I FEEL LIKE HE--
HE DIDN'T WIN ME OVER
IN THE FIRST PLACE.
IN ALL ACTUALITY,
IF, IN FACT,
I WAS A P.O.
UNFORTUNATELY,
AS BAD AS I'D
HATE TO SAY SO,
THAT BUTTON WOULD HAVE
BEEN PUNCHED 2 OR 3 TIMES,
THE TRUNK MONKEY
WOULD HAVE RAN OUT
AND GOT HIM BY NOW,
AND YOU DEFINITELY
WOULD HAVE BEEN
ON YOUR WAY BACK
TO D.O.C.
Harper: SOME PEOPLE GET OUT
AND AIN'T GOT NOBODY.
I GOT TWO P.O.s
AND A COUNSELOR
AND MY FAMILY,
SO I GOT SOMEBODY.
IT'S NO EXCUSE FOR ME
TO COME BACK
BECAUSE I GOT
A SUPPORT SYSTEM,
AND THAT'S WHAT
I NEEDED.
[ALL TALKING AT ONCE]
ALL RIGHT. FIRST OF ALL,
WHO WHAT TO SHARE?
LET'S START
WITH THIS TABLE.
"LOOKING BACK
AT YOUR FAMILY TREE,
"DESCRIBE SOME DYSFUNCTIONAL
THINGS IN YOUR FAMILY.
AND WHAT YOU BELIEVE
TO HAVE CAUSED IT."
THE DYSFUNCTIONAL
IN MY FAMILY,
I LOOK AT IT AS
COMING FROM ME.
I GREW UP
IN A FOSTER HOME,
NEVER KNEW MY MOTHER,
NEVER KNEW MY FATHER,
EVEN THOUGH I RAN AWAY
FROM MY FATHER
WITH MY TWO SISTERS
AT THE AGE OF, UH,
SOMETHING LIKE
6, 7 YEARS OLD.
NOW LET'S GO DEEPER
IF YOU CAN SHARE THAT.
WHY DID YOU RUN AWAY
FROM HOME?
UM, HE WAS
AN ABUSIVE DUDE.
EVERYBODY HAVE THEIR
LITTLE ABUSE STORY,
WHERE THEY GOT WHUPPED
WITH THIS AND THAT,
EXTENSION CORDS,
FISHING POLES,
WHATEVER, YOU KNOW,
BUT, I MEAN, I COULDN'T
EVEN BE IN THE SAME ROOM
WITH HIM WITHOUT
FINDING MYSELF--
PICKING MYSELF UP
OFF THE FLOOR,
YOU KNOW, FOR NO REASON.
WOULD YOU SEE THAT--
JUST WHAT YOU
EXPLAINED REALLY,
WOULD THAT ACTUALLY
BE A DYSFUNCTION THEN?
I MEAN, YOU CAN'T
TELL ME THAT
ON A NORMAL,
NONDYSFUNCTIONAL FAMILY
THAT THE FATHER
NORMALLY BEATS HIS KIDS
AS YOU ARE
DESCRIBING HERE.
SO ACTUALLY, IT STARTED
FROM YOUR PARENTS DOWN.
I NEVER ACTUALLY
REALIZED THAT.
LACK OF PARENTING
IS ONE OF THE PROBLEMS
AS THIS POINT.
HOW MANY KIDS--
COULD YOU SHARE
THAT WITH US--
HOW MANY KIDS
DO YOU HAVE?
LIKE 8. 7, 8 KIDS.
YOU SEE A PATTERN
AS FAR AS LACK
OF PARENTING,
IF THAT IS AN ISSUE,
AND HOW IT CAN
REPEAT ITSELF?
YEAH.
IN C.R.C.I.
WE'LL GET IT.
WE'LL PICK IT
UP LATER.
HAVE TO CALL THEM.
ALL YOUR PROPERTY.
OH, YEAH.
WOW. OK. WELL, WE'LL
PICK IT UP.
Campbell, voice-over:
YOU KNOW, BEFORE WHEN I
GOT OUT, I WAS NERVOUS
BECAUSE I REALLY DIDN'T
EVEN TRUST MYSELF.
THIS TIME AROUND
BECAUSE OF WHAT
I EXPERIENCED
IN THE A.A.P.,
IT GAVE ME AN OPPORTUNITY
TO JUST LET ALL
THAT STUFF OUT
THAT'S BEEN KEEPING ME
GOING BACK TO THE BAG
FOR MANY YEARS NOW.
YEP.
Woman: COME IN.
HEY.
AHH!
RICHARD, HI!
HEY.
HI.
OH, OH, OH.
OH, I'M SO GLAD
TO SEE YOU.
[SOBBING]
HI, DAD.
HI, CHUBBY.
CHUBBY? YEAH.
I GUESS SO.
GIVE ME YOUR HAND.
GOOD TO SEE YOU.
GOOD TO BE HOME.
YOU GONNA STAY
HOME NOW?
YEAH. YEAH, I AM.
HOW DO YOU FEEL
ABOUT BEING OUT?
PRETTY ... GOOD.
WHO DID YOU FEEL
ABOUT BEING IN?
PRETTY ... BAD.
HA HA!
YEAH. I DIDN'T LIKE
ONE MINUTE OF IT.
NOT AT ALL.
WE DIDN'T EITHER.
YEAH. THIS TIME WAS
THE WORST EXPERIENCE
OF MY LIFE.
WELL, I HOPE YOU
REALIZE THE OPPORTUNITY
THAT YOU HAVE
TO BE OUT.
YEAH, I KNOW.
YOU WASTED ALL
OF YOUR YOUTH,
AND YOU WASTED MY YOUTH
AND MY FRIENDSHIP
BECAUSE THAT'S--
THAT'S THE MOST
IMPORTANT THING
TO A FATHER...
IS HIS SON'S
FRIENDSHIP.
I'VE ALWAYS WANTED
YOUR FRIENDSHIP,
AND WHEN I BECAME
AN ADDICT,
THAT'S ONE
OF THE THINGS
THAT REALLY HURT
BECAUSE, YOU KNOW,
I COULDN'T--
I WASN'T ABLE TO
RELATE TO YOU
IN THAT WAY,
AND THAT HURT ME
AS MUCH AS IT
HURT YOU.
BELIEVE THAT.
THERE WAS TIMES
WHEN I CRIED, TOO,
OVER THAT MATTER
BECAUSE I MISSED--
I MISSED YOUR
FRIENDSHIP.
I REALLY DID.
CAN WE STILL
BE FRIENDS?
YEAH. YEAH.
WE'RE FRIENDS, RICHARD.
IT SOUNDS
KIND OF CORNY,
BUT IT MEANS
A LOT TO ME.
WELL, I THINK YOU GOT
THE WORST BEHIND YOU.
YOU JUST HAVE TO
MAKE SURE IT DOESN'T
TAKE ANY MORE TIME.
NO. I'M NOT GONNA
GIVE IT ANY MORE
TIME OUT OF MY LIFE.
YEAH.
Hayes, voice-over:
BEFORE, IT'S ALWAYS BEEN
"I AIN'T COMING BACK,
AND I'M NOT GONNA
USE DRUGS AGAIN."
THIS TIME AROUND,
IT'S JUST BEEN A DRASTIC CHANGE.
I GOT A LIFE TO LIVE,
AND IT DOESN'T CONSIST
OF DOING IT FROM THE INSIDE.
FEEL LIKE RUNNING.
HA HA HA!
I CAN RUN.
OH, THEY DONE
TORE THAT DOWN
AND REBUILT IT, HUH?
Woman: MM-HMM.
WHAT WAS THAT?
SKIPPER'S?
SKIPPER'S. YEP.
YEAH.
OH. VILLAGE INN.
YEAH. OK.
PANCAKES
AND SAUSAGE, BABY.
THAT'S WHAT I'M
TALKING ABOUT.
EGGS OVER EASY.
Hayes: I'LL HAVE
A NUMBER TWO,
EARLY RISER.
EGGS OVER EASY.
Roberts: YOUR
MOST RECENT OFFENSE
FOR BEING IN THERE
IS NOT
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
OR ASSAULT
TYPE STUFF.
WHAT WAS IT?
BURG. II.
BURGLARY?
YEAH.
OK.
AND NO PHYSICAL
AGGRESSION
OR DRUGS?
NONE.
OK.
Woman: HE'S NEVER
BEEN CHARGED
OF DOING A CRIME--
COMMITTING A CRIME TO ME.
OK. OK.
NEVER BEEN CHARGED.
YOU JUST PUT
A RESTRAINING ORDER
IN AT THAT POINT
IN TIME TO TAKE CARE
OF YOURSELF.
MM-HMM.
OK. ALL RIGHT.
Woman: SO TELL ME
A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT THIS CHARGE,
THE BURGLARY,
TAKING CASH OUT
OF A CASH DRAWER
IN A PARKING BOOTH.
WHAT HAPPENED?
WERE YOU UNDER
THE INFLUENCE
OF INTOXICANTS
AT ALL?
UH, NO.
I HADN'T BEEN DRINKING.
NO DRINKING?
WHAT WAS GOING ON
WITH YOU
AT THAT TIME?
JUST BAD JUDGMENT.
WHAT WAS YOUR
INTENTION
FOR THE MONEY?
WHAT WERE YOU
GONNA USE IT FOR?
UM, GO GET A MOTEL.
YOU HAD NOBODY YOU
COULD STAY WITH
AT THAT TIME?
NOT AT THAT TIME.
SO HOW LONG WERE YOU
ON THE STREETS
BEFORE YOU COMMITTED
THIS CRIME?
I CAN'T BE SURE.
WAS IT MONTHS, DAYS?
NO. PROBABLY LIKE
A WEEK OR TWO.
HAS THAT BEEN
AN ISSUE FOR YOU
IN THE PAST
AS FAR AS NOT HAVING
A PLACE TO STAY?
YEAH.
IS THAT AN ONGOING
THING FOR YOU?
YEAH. IT'S BEEN
PRETTY MUCH ALL MY LIFE.
I'VE NEVER HAD
MY OWN PLACE,
AND I'VE REALLY BEEN
RELYING ON--
I HAVE TWO SISTERS,
AND I'VE BEEN LIVING
BETWEEN THE TWO OF THEM,
AND THEN I STARTED
LIVING WITH THESE
DIFFERENT WOMEN,
AND THEN, UH--
IT'S TIME FOR ME
TO HAVE MY OWN PLACE,
I THINK, YOU KNOW.
P.P.D.S. LISTS
A BUNCH
OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
INCIDENTS,
WHETHER OR NOT
THE POLICE CAME OUT
TO THE HOME
OR WHETHER
YOU WERE ARRESTED.
WHAT WERE THOSE
ABOUT?
THE DOMESTIC THING
EVOLVED AROUND THE DRUGS,
YOU KNOW WHAT I'M SAYING?
SEE, IT'S MORE OR LESS
THE CHOICES, THE WOMEN
THAT I CHOOSE.
ARE YOU TELLING ME
THEY INSTIGATED
FIGHTS WITH YOU OR...
NO. WHAT I SAY--
WHAT I SAY
WHEN I SAY THAT
IS THAT, YOU KNOW,
I TOLERATE A WOMAN
THAT'S ON DRUGS
IF I'M NOT ON DRUGS.
AND THEN THE LAST
THING TODAY IS
I'M GONNA WALK
YOU BACK OUT
TO THE LOBBY.
HAVE A SEAT.
I'LL LET THEM KNOW
YOU'RE WAITING
FOR HOUSING,
AND HOPEFULLY,
THEY'RE OUT
OF THEIR MEETING,
AND THEY'LL ADVISE
YOU OF WHERE YOU'RE
GONNA BE STAYING AT.
ALL RIGHT.
OK.
THEN THE VIETNAMESE
GARLIC HOT SAUCE--
OH, MAN, THAT'S--
WHOO-WEE!
THAT'S BOMB.
MAKE ANYTHING
TASTE GOOD.
LET ME SEE THAT.
HA HA HA!
HARBOR LIGHTS.
YOU BEEN THERE BEFORE?
MM. THEY REFERRED ME
OVER THERE ONE TIME,
AND I WENT
OVER THERE AND--
AND DIDN'T STAY.
HARBOR LIGHTS?
THE SHELTER?
MM-HMM.
NO.
WHY YOU CAN'T MAKE
THE DECISION?
FOR HIM TO STAY THERE?
YEAH.
IS IT OK?
THAT'S WHAT I'M
ASKING YOU RIGHT NOW.
YEAH, IT'S OK.
YOU GOT ROOM?
PEOPLE ARE SAYING
THAT IT'S NOT OK.
HE HAS DRAWER SPACE.
THE ONLY THING WE
GOT TO WORK ON
IS CLOSET SPACE.
WHAT PEOPLE?
JUST--WE'LL WORK
THIS OUT.
WE'LL REALLY
WORK THIS OUT.
NO. SERIOUSLY,
YOU'RE OK WITH THAT
BECAUSE I DON'T
WANT YOU--
WE'LL WORK THIS OUT
BECAUSE HARBOR LIGHTS--
WHEN YOU GOT SOMEWHERE
TO STAY, WHY STAY
IN A SHELTER?
YEAH. BECAUSE I'M--
I'M GONNA BE--
I ALREADY KNOW
THE SITUATION
WITH THAT, SO...
WHERE THE KIDS AT?
MR. DUDERS?
HEH HEH.
HEY, BUDDY!
HA HA HA!
WHAT'S UP?
Hayes, voice-over:
A LOT OF TIMES WHEN
I BEEN GETTING OUT,
YOU KNOW WHAT I'M SAYING,
I MIGHT BE AT THE HOUSE
LONG ENOUGH
TO DROP OFF MY BOX,
MY BAGS, WHATEVER,
AND THEN I'M OUT THE DOOR
AND BEATING THE STREET.
I THINK THAT BY GOING HOME
AND SPENDING TIME
WITH THE FAMILY,
ESPECIALLY IN
THE RELATIONSHIP SITUATION
WHICH I'M KIND OF FACING,
THERE'S A LOT OF FEARS,
TRUST ISSUES,
STUFF LIKE THAT.
SO IT'S GOOD TO SPEND TIME
AND TALK OVER
SOME OF THE ISSUES
THAT ARE AT HAND,
KIND OF EASE THE MIND,
YOU KNOW WHAT I'M SAYING?
THAT FOR THE MUSIC?
Roberts: IT'S GOOD
TO SEE YOU, MAN.
GOOD TO SEE YOU.
I'M GLAD YOU CALLED.
HOW'S LIFE, MAN?
MAN, YOU KNOW, JUST
GOING TO THESE
JOB INTERVIEWS
AND, YOU KNOW,
GETTING SHOT DOWN,
YOU KNOW WHAT
I MEAN?
I GOT A GOOD LITTLE
LEAD HERE FOR A JOB
THAT I THINK YOU MIGHT
APPRECIATE.
KIND OF A PRETTY GOOD
SETUP HERE.
IT'S LONG-TERM,
GOT BENEFITS
AND THE WHOLE SHOT.
OK.
YOUR OFFENSE
IS GONNA PROBABLY
MAKE HIM LOOK AT YOU
CROSS-EYED FOR SECOND.
THEN HE GONNA COME BACK
TO--YOU KNOW, THEN--
THEN YOU SAY,
"HERE'S MY P.O.'s"--
AS A MATTER OF FACT,
I WANT YOU TO TAKE
ONE OF MY CARDS
AND GIVE IT TO HIM.
OK.
YOUR OFFENSE MAKES HIM
LOOK AT--
THAT'S AUTOMATIC.
YOU'VE PROBABLY BEEN
GETTING THAT
ALL ALONG ANYWAY.
OH, MAN.
AS SOON AS I GET
IN THE INTERVIEW,
THEY'RE "OK.
WHAT WERE YOU
CONVICTED OF?"
"UH, I WAS CONVICTED
OF A HOMICIDE, SIR."
AND THEIR EYES GO
RNN RNN RNN RNN!
THEY SIT BACK...
HA HA HA!
TAKE A REAL GOOD
LOOK AT ME.
IT'S TOUGH FOR PEOPLE
TO COMPREHEND THAT
SOMETIMES.
AND THEN THEY'RE
LIKE, "OK. WELL,
WE'LL CALL YOU."
I SAY, "OK."
THEN I GIVE THEM
MY GOING-OUT-THE-DOOR
SPEECH, YOU KNOW,
"BELIEVE ME.
IF YOU GIVE ME
THE JOB,
"I'LL BE A DEPENDABLE
INDIVIDUAL FOR YOU
"AND GIVE YOU
A HARD'S DAY WORK--
A HARD DAY'S WORK."
YEAH, YEAH.
AND THEN THEY
TELL ME "OK.
WE'LL CALL YOU."
HA HA HA!
AND THAT PHONE
NEVER--THAT PHONE
NEVER RINGS
ON THAT JOB.
I WAS LIKE, "AWW."
SOON AS I LEAVE HERE,
I'M GONNA GO OUT THERE
AND GO GET
THE APPLICATION,
PUT THE APPLICATION
IN AND, UH--
AND JUST BE UP FRONT
WITH HIM
BECAUSE HE WORKS
WITH SEVERAL OTHER PEOPLE
IN THE OFFICE HERE.
IS THAT RIGHT?
YEAH.
HE'S A REAL GOOD GUY,
SO JUST BE UP FRONT
WITH HIM.
MOST DEFINITELY.
I WILL.
YEAH.
Scott: SIMON WAS
JUST TEMPORARY.
WHO'S NEXT?
West: I'LL GO.
MY NAME IS RANDY WEST.
I'M TIRED. I JUST GOT
A JOB THIS MORNING.
I START TOMORROW
AT 6 A.M.
THANK YOU.
I WENT YESTERDAY
ON A JOB LEAD,
WENT IN, FILLED OUT
MY APPLICATION.
THE GUY GAVE ME
A PREINTERVIEW
RIGHT THERE ON THE SPOT.
I TOLD HIM THAT I
DON'T KNOW EVERYTHING
ABOUT THIS JOB,
BUT I'M WILLING TO LEARN,
AND, YOU KNOW, SO HE SAYS,
"WELL, IF YOU'RE
WILLING TO LEARN,
"WE'RE WILLING
TO TEACH YOU
HOW TO HANDLE THE JOB,"
AND SO, YOU KNOW,
SO THEY GAVE ME
AN OPPORTUNITY.
Man: DID YOUR HISTORY
EVER COME UP?
WELL, MY HISTORY CAME UP.
HE ASKED ME HOW MUCH
TIME I DID,
AND I TOLD HIM I DID
16 YEARS.
I TOLD HIM I WAS
IN JAIL FOR HOMICIDE,
YOU KNOW WHAT I MEAN?
I WAS JUST UP FRONT
ABOUT IT, YOU KNOW?
HERE IT IS.
THIS IS WHO I AM.
THIS IS WHO YOU
WILL BE EMPLOYING.
YOU KNOW, I'M REAL GLAD
THAT I'M BACK UP
AND WORKING.
YOU KNOW, ONE THING
I LIKE TO DO IS
I LIKE TO WORK,
AND I'VE BEEN DOWN
FOR A MINUTE,
SO, YOU KNOW
WHAT I MEAN,
I'M READY, I'M RARING
AND READY TO GO.
YOU KNOW, I DIDN'T
HAVE TO COME TODAY
BECAUSE NOW I'M EMPLOYED,
BUT I WANTED TO COME IN
AND SHARE THAT
YOU KNOW,
WITH EVERYBODY HERE
BECAUSE WHEN I
WASN'T EMPLOYED,
EVERYBODY ELSE WAS HERE
SHARING, SO...
Man: I'VE WORKED
IN THE GANG UNIT
FOR THE LAST 3 1/2, 4 YEARS,
SO I'VE DEALT
WITH GANG MEMBERS
DURING THAT TIME.
CASE LOAD THAT I HAD BEFORE,
IT WAS LIKE CATCH ME IF YOU CAN.
I WASN'T USED TO GUYS--
YOU KNOW, NOW I GOT
GUYS CALLING UP,
SAYING, "HEY, I NEED TO COME
AND TALK TO YOU,"
AND THEY COME IN,
AND THEY PUT IT ALL
ON THE TABLE, YOU KNOW,
AND THAT'S REFRESHING.
Harper, voice-over:
I WAS JOB SEARCHING.
I WENT INTO
ONE BUSINESS,
ASKED ABOUT A--
I TOLD HIM I HAD
FILLED OUT
AN APPLICATION.
THEY SAID THEY
WASN'T HIRING,
SO THEN I WENT
ACROSS THE STREET.
THE NEXT THING
I KNOW, TWO PEOPLE
WAS FOLLOWING ME,
YOU KNOW,
AND I LOOKED,
AND I SAID,
"I DON'T KNOW
WHAT FOR,"
SO I JUST KEPT ON
KNOCKING ON DOORS.
THE NEXT THING
I KNOW, HERE COME
THE POLICE.
THEN ONE THING LED
TO ANOTHER.
I TOLD HIM THAT
I WAS ON PAROLE,
AND I GAVE HIM
TRAVIS' NAME,
AND THE FIRST THING
HE ASKED ME,
"WELL, WHEN
THE LAST TIME
YOU SEEN HIM?"
I SAID, "TWO DAYS
AGO," YOU KNOW,
AND IT WAS KIND OF
LIKE A SHOCK.
YOU KNOW, I SAID,
"WELL, I BE IN TOUCH
WITH HIM ALL THE TIME."
YOU KNOW, I KNOW
A LOT OF PEOPLE--
YOU KNOW, I USED
TO GET IN.
YOU KNOW, I USED TO
CHECK IN AND...
YOU KNOW.
THEN WHEN HE CAME BACK,
HE HAD, LIKE, A KIND
OF FROWN ON HIS FACE,
AND I SAID, "WELL,
I KNOW YOU TALKED
TO TRAVIS, RIGHT?"
HE SAID, "YEAH."
I SAID, "WELL, WHAT
YOU GONNA DO?"
HE SAID, "WELL, I'M
GONNA TAKE YOU BACK
AND LET YOU GO."
COME ON IN.
Scott: ONE REASON
WHY YOU'RE BEING--
YOU'RE IN VIOLATION
OF YOUR SUPERVISION
IS BECAUSE YOU LEFT
TREATMENT,
AND WHEN WE TALKED,
YOU TALKED ABOUT
HAVING A BEER,
SO YOU RELAPSED
PRETTY MUCH.
I HAD THE BEER
THE DAY AFTER
I LEFT TREATMENT.
OK. DOES THAT
MAKE A DIFFERENCE
IF IT'S A DAY AFTER?
I'M JUST TELLING YOU
WHAT HAPPENED,
THAT'S ALL.
OK. BUT WHERE DO
YOU THINK THAT WE
NEED TO GO FROM HERE?
I DON'T KNOW.
IT'S--
THE LAST 16 YEARS
OF MY LIFE HAVE JUST
BEEN A MESS BASICALLY.
I MEAN, YOU'VE GOT
THE BLACK AND WHITE
YOURSELF,
SO YOU KNOW THAT,
AND, UH, IT'S BEEN
LIKE IT'S BEEN
ON A HOLDING PATTERN,
YOU KNOW?
AND I'M JUST TIRED OF--
I'M JUST TIRED
OF MY LIFE NOT
GOING ANYWHERE.
THE LAST FEW, UH...
I DON'T KNOW.
IT'S LIKE TREATMENT
FOR ME HAS BEEN
MORE TRAUMATIC
THAN THERAPEUTIC
TO BE QUITE HONEST.
I'M JUST TIRED OF THIS.
I'M JUST TIRED
OF BEING LOCKED UP.
I AM TIRED...
OF NOT DOING SOMETHING
WITH MY LIFE.
I DIDN'T EXPECT
THIS TO HAPPEN.
I CAN'T BELIEVE
I'M CRYING ON CAMERA.
UM...
AS FAR AS EVER USING
AGAIN, IT AIN'T
GONNA HAPPEN
BECAUSE, FROM WHAT
I'VE SEEN, IT'S JUST
A DEAD END STREET,
AND IT'S NOT THE WAY
I WAS RAISED,
SO I DON'T WANT
TO BE OUT THERE,
YOU KNOW, WASTING
MY LIFE BEHIND A BAG
OR A BOTTLE.
EXCUSE MY LANGUAGE,
BUT ... THAT ...
WHAT DOES IT TAKE
FOR YOU TO GET
WHAT YOU NEED
IN ORDER FOR YOU
TO SUCCEED?
WHAT'S THAT?
I GOT TO THINKING
ABOUT EXACTLY WHAT WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT RIGHT NOW.
THESE ARE JUST
A FEW IDEAS.
WHY DO YOU THINK
THAT OUT-PATIENT
TREATMENT
IS GOOD FOR YOU?
I ACTUALLY NEED
TO BE DOING SOMETHING
WITH MY LIFE.
I'M TIRED OF MY LIFE--
IT'S JUST BEEN
ON A REALLY SCREWED UP,
GO-NOWHERE PATTERN
FOR THE PAST 16
FREAKING YEARS.
YOU KNOW, BEFORE I CAME
A DRUG ADDICT,
I WORKED
AT U.S. NATIONAL BANK,
I WAS GOING TO COLLEGE,
MAJORING IN TELEVISION
AND VIDEO PRODUCTION.
I ACTUALLY HAD
A LOT GOING ON
FOR MYSELF.
YOU'RE NOT DOING
THAT.
EXACTLY.
THAT'S MY POINT.
I'M NOT DOING
THAT RIGHT NOW, AND--
I GOT ANOTHER
QUESTION FOR YOU.
THE REASON WHY YOU
LEFT TREATMENT
WAS TO LIVE
WITH THIS GIRL
BECAUSE YOU MET
THIS GIRL,
ISN'T THAT CORRECT?
I WASN'T PLANNING
ON LIVING WITH HER.
I DIDN'T GO STRAIGHT
TO HER HOUSE.
I WASN'T--I DIDN'T
LEAVE TREATMENT
JUST TO GO LIVE
WITH HER, NO.
NO, I DIDN'T.
I CALLED HER SUNDAY,
AND SHE SAID,
"WOULD YOU LIKE
TO COME OVER?"
"OK. YEAH. I WOULD."
AND THEN I CALLED YOU
MONDAY AND LET YOU KNOW
WHERE I WAS AT.
I DIDN'T LEAVE TREATMENT
TO GO BE WITH HER.
NO, I DIDN'T.
SO YOU'RE TELLING ME
THAT YOU DIDN'T
LOSE FOCUS
OFF YOUR TREATMENT
AND START FOCUSING
ON THIS WOMAN...
MORE THAN MY TREATMENT?
NO.
YEAH. AND LEFT
TREATMENT.
SHE'S NOT GONNA
KEEP ME CLEAN.
THAT'S REALLY--
NO, SHE ISN'T.
NO. THAT'S ONLY OBVIOUS.
THAT'S ONLY COMMON SENSE.
SHE IS NOT GONNA
KEEP ME--
YEAH, I LOVE HER.
I LOVE HER TO DEATH,
AND I PLAN ON GETTING
MARRIED TO HER, OK,
BUT ANOTHER HUMAN--
YOU MET HER WHAT,
TWO MONTHS AGO?
YEAH.
OK.
ANOTHER HUMAN BEING
IS NOT GONNA HELP ME
STAY CLEAN.
ONLY I CAN DO THAT
FOR MYSELF.
OK. THAT'S
THE REASON WHY
I'M RECOMMENDING
THAT YOU GO BACK
TO IN-PATIENT
TREATMENT
BECAUSE WHAT I KNOW
IS THAT YOUR
BEST THINKING
GOT YOU WHERE
YOU'RE AT TODAY.
HAVE YOU TALKED
TO MY COUNSELOR
THERE--KELLY?
TELL ME WHAT YOU
WERE GOING THROUGH.
WHAT I WAS GOING THROUGH
WERE OTHER CLIENTS
WERE DELIBERATELY TRYING
TO SABOTAGE MY PROGRAM,
TRY TO MAKE THINGS
HARDER ON ME DELIBERATELY.
ASK HER.
SHE WILL TELL YOU.
THEY MADE ME
SECURITY MANAGER
OF THE PLACE,
AND AS SOON AS THEY DID,
I BECAME A TARGET.
AND IT SEEMS LIKE
YOU HAVE THIS
ONGOING KIND
OF THING
THAT PEOPLE ARE
TRYING TO
SABOTAGE YOU.
I DON'T UNDERSTAND IT
BECAUSE I USUALLY
KEEP TO MYSELF.
I MIND MY OWN BUSINESS,
DO MY OWN TIME,
AND KEEP TO MYSELF.
RIGHT, BUT ISN'T
THAT TRUE?
ISN'T THAT THE WAY
THAT YOU FEEL,
THAT PEOPLE
ARE TRYING TO
SABOTAGE YOU.
IT'S NOT PARANOIA.
IT'S JUST--
DID I BRING THAT UP?
I'M JUST PUTTING
IT OUT THERE.
IT'S NOT.
THAT WOULD BE
THE NEXT ASSUMPTION
I'D IMAGINE.
YOU SAY THAT YOU'VE
BEEN IN TROUBLE
ALL THIS TIME.
YOU'VE BEEN
IN TROUBLE
FOR 16 YEARS.
"MY LIFE'S BEEN
TERRIBLE
FOR 16 YEARS,"
AND IT'S BEEN
CHAOTIC AND TERRIBLE
BECAUSE
OF THE CHOICES
THAT YOU'VE MADE
IN LIFE.
SO WHAT I'M DOING
IS THAT I'M SAYING
THAT I HAVE MADE
A DECISION
THAT I'M GOING TO
IMPOSE A SANCTION
OF SOME ODD AMOUNT
OF DAYS IN JAIL
AND THAT YOU'RE
GONNA GO BACK TO
IN-PATIENT TREATMENT.
Scott, voice-over: HE APPEARS
VERY INTELLIGENT,
BUT HE MAKES VERY POOR CHOICES.
I THINK HE NEEDS
A MENTAL HEALTH EVALUATION.
I THINK THERE'S SOME PARANOIA
GOING ON THERE
THAT HE'S NOT AWARE OF.
I THINK THAT HE'S AWARE
THAT WE THINK THAT THERE'S
SOME PARANOIA GOING ON,
SO HE WAS REALLY
ADAMANT ABOUT THAT.
WHAT I BELIEVE IS THAT
HE MAY NOT STAY IN TREATMENT,
AND I THINK THAT HE'S
UNAWARE OF THE FACT
THAT THE WOMAN THAT HE
MET HAS DEFOCUSED HIM
OFF OF HIS RECOVERY,
OUT OF TREATMENT,
AND BACK INTO THE COMMUNITY.
I MEAN, YOU NEVER CAN TELL
WHAT THE SUCCESS RATE IS
BECAUSE THAT LIGHT
MAY TURN ON ANY MINUTE.
IT COULD BE TURNING ON
RIGHT NOW,
AND WE DON'T EVEN KNOW IT.
HE COULD BE SITTING
IN HIS CELL RIGHT NOW,
THINKING, "YOU KNOW WHAT?
MARQUITA WAS RIGHT
"ABOUT THE FACT THAT
THAT WOMAN DERAILED ME
FROM MY OWN TREATMENT PROGRAM."
BUT YOU DON'T KNOW.
YOU JUST HAVE TO
KEEP TRYING, YOU KNOW.
AS LONG AS THEY'RE BREATHING,
THERE'S AN OPPORTUNITY
FOR THEM TO STAY
CLEAN AND SOBER.
JUST AS LONG
AS THEY'RE BREATHING.
Camellia: HELLO?
HEY, CAMELLIA.
UH-HUH.
HAVE YOU HEARD
FROM HIM YET?
NO. I SURE HAVEN'T.
OK. HEY. DID YOU GUYS
HAVE ANY CONFLICT
THIS WEEKEND?
YEAH, WE DID.
OK. I WAS KIND OF
SUSPECTING THAT
WHEN I TALKED
TO YOU EARLIER.
WHAT'S GOING ON?
I DON'T KNOW.
JUST A LITTLE
LOVERS' QUARREL,
I GUESS.
LOVERS' QUARREL?
YEAH.
NO PHYSICAL CONTACT?
NO HITTING?
OH, NO.
NO PHYSICAL CONTACT
AT ALL.
JUST KIND OF NEED
SOME FINANCIAL HELP,
AND HE CAN ONLY
DO SO MUCH NOW,
YOU KNOW?
OK. SO WHAT'S UP
WITH THE DRUG USE STUFF?
UM, HE TOLD ME
HE SMOKED SOME WEED
THAT MORNING,
BUT I KNOW HE'S
DOING MORE.
I BELIEVE HE IS,
TOO.
ARE YOU USING?
NO.
YOU HAVEN'T USED
AT ALL WITH HIM?
UH-UH.
I SURE HAVEN'T.
IF HE CALLS,
I'LL LET HIM KNOW
THAT YOU'RE TRYING
TO GET AHOLD
TO HIM AND STUFF.
WELL, WHAT YOU
CAN LET HIM KNOW
IS THAT IF I DON'T
SEE HIM IN THE NEXT
COUPLE OF DAYS,
HE'S GOING TO JAIL.
THAT'S WHAT YOU
CAN LET HIM KNOW.
I'M GONNA TRY TO GET
HIM SOME HELP FIRST,
BUT IF HE DOESN'T
RESPOND TO IT,
THEN THAT'S WHAT
WE'RE GONNA DO.
WE'RE GONNA...
HAVE TO GO
TO ANOTHER LEVEL.
YEAH. TAKE IT
ABSOLUTELY.
I KNOW HE'S THERE.
ALL RIGHT.
YOU HEAR SOMEBODY?
SOMEBODY SAID,
"CAN I HELP YOU?"
HEY. YOUR MOM HERE?
CAMELLIA?
CAMELLIA HERE?
HUH?
CAMELLIA AND ARTHUR,
ARTHUR HAYES.
NOTHING.
I'M ARTHUR'S P.O.
ARTHUR'S NOT HERE.
Camellia: YEAH.
HE'S NOT HERE.
HEY, GIRL.
HOW YOU DOING?
I COULDN'T FIND HIM
DOWNTOWN ON THE BRICKS,
SO I FIGURED YOU
WAS COMING.
I HAVE TO DO
A HOME VISIT
BEFORE I PUT
A WARRANT OUT
FOR HIM ANYWAY.
HEY, LADY.
YOU BETTER GET
THAT IN THERE.
I'M COVERING
MY MOUTH.
IS SHE YOUR MOM?
HOW YOU DOING,
MA'AM?
IT'S GOOD
TO MEET YOU.
THAT'S
TRAVIS CAMPBELL.
NANNY, DID YOU
GIVE ME THIS OUTFIT?
HEY, MAN. HEY.
Camellia: HE'S BEEN
DOWNTOWN ON THE BRICKS
AND ALL THAT.
WELL, ONCE WE GET
HIM STRAIGHT,
HE GONNA GO TO--
WE HAVE TO GET HIM
IN TREATMENT
AND STUFF.
SO ONCE HE'S
STRAIGHT,
IS HE WELCOME
TO COME BACK?
YEAH.
OK. JUST
MAKING SURE.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.
GOOD NIGHT ALL.
IT'S ALL RIGHT.
JUST STAY
IN CONTACT.
ALL RIGHT. I WILL.
SO NOW WE JUST PUT OUT
THE WARRANT FOR HIM.
IF WE DON'T FIND
HIM TONIGHT--
PUT WARRANT OUT--
HE'S GONNA HAVE
A WARRANT MONDAY,
SO I'LL PUT IT
OUT FOR HIM.
THEN WE CAN ALSO--
ONCE WE GET
OUR STUFF
CAUGHT UP
WITH THE OFFICE
AND STUFF,
WE CAN PROBABLY
GET BACK OUT HERE
AND GET OUT
DOWNTOWN.
YEAH.
AND KIND OF LOOK
FOR HIM THEN, TOO,
BUT THAT'S WHAT'S
UP WITH ARTHUR.
TOO BAD, MAN.
YEAH.
Roberts: WHAT'S UP, MAN?
TURNED YOURSELF IN, HUH?
YEAH.
HOW YOU DO THAT?
WHAT'S GOING ON, MAN?
THINGS DIDN'T GO
THE WAY THAT
I HAD PLANNED
FOR THEM TO GO,
WHICH I
SEMI-CALCULATED,
BUT I DIDN'T THINK
IT WAS GONNA BE
THIS BAD,
YOU KNOW WHAT
I'M SAYING?
MY HOUSING SITUATION
JUST REALLY JUST
PUT A DAMPER
IN THE WHOLE
PROGRAM.
HAVING TO LIVE
WITH YOUR GIRL, RIGHT?
THAT WAS
A BAD SITUATION,
AND YOU WAS THROWING
WARNING SIGNS UP
ALL DAY LONG,
BUT WHAT'S HAPPENING--
WHAT HAPPENED
AS FAR AS I KNOW
IS THAT WITH
THE HOUSING SITUATION
COUNTY'S GOING THROUGH TIMES
OF BUDGET CRISIS BASICALLY,
AND I TRIED TO
EXPRESS THAT.
I KNOW IT DOESN'T
MATTER WHEN YOU'RE
IN NEED AT THAT
POINT IN TIME,
BUT WE'VE HAD TO TURN
AWAY MANY PEOPLE
BECAUSE OF THAT,
SO THE TRANSITIONAL
HOUSING THING IS
REALLY TOUGH RIGHT NOW.
I GOT TO REFLECT
ON EVERYTHING SINCE
I'VE BEEN OUT
AND GET MY HEAD
BACK TO WHERE, OK,
THINGS IS NOT GONNA
ALWAYS BE LIKE
I WANT THEM--
YOU KNOW, LIKE,
IF I PLAN,
"THIS HOUSING
GONNA JUMP OFF,
BLAH, BLAH, BLAH,"
IT'S NOT ALWAYS
GONNA BE THAT WAY,
SO BE PREPARED
FOR, YOU KNOW,
WHATEVER.
AND HONESTLY,
WHERE ARE YOU AT
WITH YOUR ADDICTION?
YOU READY TO STOP,
YOU READY TO ARREST
THAT WHOLE THING?
YEAH.
OK.
I MEAN, I KNOW
YOU ALWAYS DO
THAT. "YEAH. "
I MEAN, I'M SAYING--
YOU KNOW,
I FEEL LIKE,
YOU KNOW WHAT
I'M SAYING,
DRUGS ISN'T
THE ISSUE.
OK. OK. WHAT'S
THE ISSUE?
SO WHAT'S
THE ISSUE IS
HOUSING, HOUSING.
HERE'S A GOOD OPTION
RIGHT NOW IS THE--
AFTER YOU GET DONE
WITH THE TREATMENT PROGRAM,
IF YOU CAN DISCIPLINE
YOURSELF ENOUGH
TO STAY THERE TO FINISH,
WHAT THEY DO IS
WHEN YOU GET
INTO PHASE 3,
BOTH PLACES,
THEY'LL WORK WITH YOU
TO HAVE ACCESS
TO REALLY GOOD HOUSING,
SO WE'LL JUST--
YOU KNOW, WE'LL
WORK FROM--
WE'LL WORK THIS OUT
RIGHT NOW.
I'M CLEAR?
I FEEL LIKE
I'M REALLY CLEAR.
YOU'RE CLEAR,
AND I'M CLEAR
ON WHERE YOU NEED TO BE,
WHAT YOU WANT
BECAUSE MOST FOLKS
THAT ARE OUT THERE
DON'T TURN
THEMSELVES IN.
WE GOT TO GO FIND THEM,
CATCH THEM,
PUT A WARRANT OUT,
WHATEVER.
SO YOU DID
THE RIGHT THING
THIS TIME,
BUT I FOR SURE AM
GONNA GET YOU SET UP
WITH SOMETHING, FOR SURE.
WHATEVER WE GOT,
I'M GONNA GET IT FOR YOU.
I'M GONNA TRY
TO GET IT TO YOU.
West: YOU GET UP AND SAY,
"OK. I'M GONNA HAVE ME--
"OK. I'M GONNA HAVE ME
TWO PIECES OF BACON,
ONE EGG,
AND TWO PANCAKES."
2 PANCAKES TURN
INTO 6, 3 EGGS,
AND 5 PIECES OF BACON
AND SOME SAUSAGE
AND A BIG OLD GLASS
OF ORANGE JUICE,
AND THEN YOU TURN AROUND
AND YOU LOOK UP,
YOU GOING THROUGH
THE DRIVE-THROUGH
AT EITHER McDONALD'S,
BURGER KING, TACO BELL.
OH, MAN.
HA HA HA!
NEXT TIME YOU
TURN AROUND,
YOU LOOKING.
YOUR PANTS ARE
TOO TIGHT.
HA HA HA!
YOUR PANTS ARE
TOO TIGHT.
YOU WONDERING, LIKE,
"HOW DID I GET
LIKE THIS?"
IT KILLS YOU, MAN.
THAT'S FUNNY.
THAT IS FUNNY.
TODAY'S OUR DAILY ROUTINE
WHERE WE COME ON DOWN HERE
TO THE PARK AND GET IT IN.
WHICH FOOT?
HA HA HA!
OHH!
I HAD HIM ON THAT.
West, voice-over:
YOU KNOW, I HAD ONE JOB
THAT I REALLY LIKED,
AND I HAD THE JOB
FOR ABOUT A WEEK.
YOU KNOW, THEY TRIED
TO GIVE ME THE EXCUSE
THAT I WASN'T WORKING
HARD ENOUGH FOR FAST ENOUGH,
AND I WAS TELLING THEM
"WELL, YOU KNOW, I'M
JUST NOW LEARNING THE JOB."
COME TO FIND OUT,
THE OTHER GUY THAT
WAS TRAINING ME,
THEY FIRED HIM, TOO.
IT'S BECAUSE HE WAS
LACKING ON THE JOB,
AND SO I GOT FIRED
BECAUSE HE WAS LACKING
ON THE JOB,
AND BEING THAT HE
WAS TRAINING ME
MADE IT LOOK LIKE THAT I
WAS LACKING ON THE JOB, TOO.
MY PAROLE OFFICER NATE ROBERTS,
HE HAD TALKED TO THEM,
AND THEY HAD KIND OF CONVEYED
THAT MESSAGE TO HIM,
BUT THEY NEVER CALLED ME.
IT AIN'T NO PROBLEM.
THAT'S HOW LIFE IS.
LIFE AIN'T FAIR.
IT'S NEVER FAIR.
HE BEEN GONE SINCE--
HOW OLD WAS I
WHEN YOU LEFT?
ABOUT 2 1/2.
2 1/2, 3.
ME AND MY GRANDMAS,
MY MOM, HIS BROTHER,
MY UNCLE,
WE WENT AROUND--
WE WENT DOWN
TO SALEM
ABOUT EVERY--
WE TRIED TO GO
AT LEAST
EVERY OTHER WEEKEND,
LET HIM KNOW THAT
THE LOVE WAS
STILL THERE.
ME AND MY GIRL,
WE'RE FIXING TO HAVE--
WE'RE FIXING
TO HAVE A KID.
GOT ONE ON THE WAY,
SO, YOU KNOW, I'M LOOKING
REAL FORWARD TO THAT.
YOU KNOW, I'M GONNA
MAKE SURE THIS TIME AROUND
I'M GONNA BE THERE
FOR THE DURATION.
Roberts: ARE YOU
PRETTY NERVOUS?
AM I NERVOUS?
YEAH.
ABOUT GETTING
MARRIED?
COME ON, MAN.
YOU EVER BEEN
MARRIED BEFORE?
YEAH, I BEEN
MARRIED BEFORE.
THAT'S WHY I'M NERVOUS.
WELL, THE LADY I'M
ENGAGED TO,
SHE HAD A FEW
MEDICAL CONCERNS
THIS WEEKEND,
AND WE TALKED ABOUT IT
AND DECIDED MAYBE SHE
SHOULD COME
TO THE DOCTOR TODAY
AND GET IT CHECKED OUT.
YOU KNOW, IT'S--
WITH CHILDREN ON THE WAY,
I'M NOT TAKING
NO CHANCES.
CHILDREN?
YOU SAID CHILDREN.
SO YOU'RE HAVING--
TWINS.
OK. TWINS
ON THE WAY.
PLURAL. YEAH.
THAT'S BEAUTIFUL,
MAN.
YEAH. I WASN'T
EXPECTING ANYTHING
LIKE THAT.
I'M STILL
KIND OF STUNNED.
FIRST KIDS?
NO. I HAVE--
I HAVE A PREVIOUS SON
FROM A RELATIONSHIP
I WAS INVOLVED IN
WHEN I WAS IN COLLEGE.
HOW OLD IS HE?
HE'S 14.
14 YEARS OLD. OK.
DO YOU SEE HIM?
DO YOU EVER SEE HIM?
I'VE CALLED HIM.
I'M GONNA TRY TO GIVE
HIM A CALL AGAIN
THIS WEEK.
OH, GOOD.
YOU KNOW, I'VE BEEN
HOLDING OFF
UNTIL I WAS STABLE
ENOUGH IN MY OWN LIFE
TO MAKE A CONTACT
WITH HIM.
WELL, I MEAN,
I'M GLAD YOU'RE
FREE, MAN.
DOING WELL.
I'M GLAD I'M
FREE, TOO.
YEAH, YEAH.
MAKES A REAL
BIG DIFFERENCE.
I'M IN TREATMENT
RIGHT NOW.
UM...
DON'T REALLY LIKE IT
TOO MUCH.
IT'S NOT THE PROGRAM ITSELF.
THERE'S SOME PARTICULAR
ASPECTS OF THE PROGRAM
I'M HAVING TO DEAL WITH
I REALLY DON'T CARE
TOO MUCH FOR.
AND MY FATHER.
HE'S GOT TERMINAL CANCER,
AND HE'S ONLY GOT,
LIKE, TWO MONTHS TO LIVE,
AND THAT'S
RATHER DISAPPOINTING
BECAUSE I WAS HOPING
THAT, YOU KNOW,
MY FIANCÉE'S AND MY KIDS
WOULD BE BORN
BEFORE HE PASSED AWAY,
BUT IRONICALLY,
IT'S, UH, MAKING ME VALUE
MY RECOVERY
A LITTLE BIT STRONGER.
YOU KNOW, IT'S LIKE--
IT'S MAKING ME REALIZE
JUST HOW SHORT OUR TIME
ON EARTH REALLY IS.
Harper: I NEED
TO CHECK IN.
I'M DOING OK.
IT'S BEEN KIND OF ROUGH,
MOVING AND TAKING
CARE OF MY SISTER,
AND I'M GONNA HAVE TO
TAKE HER TO THE HOSPITAL
SOON AS I GET BACK
BECAUSE SHE'S NOT
DOING TOO GOOD,
AND SHE HAVE CANCER.
SHE CAN BARELY
GET AROUND,
SO, YOU KNOW, I'VE
BEEN GOING THROUGH A LOT
OF THINGS WITH THAT,
BUT OTHER THAN THAT,
YOU KNOW,
I'M NOT IN NO TROUBLE.
BEEN DOING THE RIGHT THING
BECAUSE I'M NOT TRYING
TO GO BACK.
I'M TRYING TO STAY
OUT HERE.
YOU KNOW, BECAUSE IT'S
GETTING CLOSE.
I DON'T KNOW HOW MUCH
LONGER SHE GONNA LAST,
YOU KNOW, SO I GOT TO
BE THERE FOR HER.
AND SAY, RICHARD, ABOUT--
YOU KNOW, YOU SAY
YOUR FATHER'S ABOUT READY
TO PASS AWAY,
AND YOUR MOTHER
AND YOUR FATHER BEEN
TOGETHER FOR A LONG TIME.
MY MOTHER AND FATHER WAS
TOGETHER FOR A LONG TIME,
AND MY FATHER
PASSED AWAY--SHOOT--
30 YEARS AGO, YOU KNOW,
AND I USED TO THINK
I DIDN'T KNOW HOW
MY MOTHER WAS GONNA
HANDLE IT, YOU KNOW,
BUT SHE HANDLED IT,
YOU KNOW.
IT SEEM ROUGH,
BUT SHE'LL GET
THROUGH IT.
SHE'LL MAKE IT.
THANK YOU.
Gamble: GOT TO FIND OUT
WHICH DOOR IT IS.
HEY, CALVIN.
HOW YOU DOING?
IS IT ALL RIGHT
IF WE COME IN?
HOW HAVE THINGS
BEEN GOING SINCE
YOUR SISTER PASSED?
WELL, IT BEEN
KIND OF ROUGH,
BUT, YOU KNOW,
I'M STILL HANGING
IN THERE.
I'M KIND OF--
STILL KIND
OF GRIEVING
BECAUSE I GOT TO
SOMEHOW GET ALL
THE REST
OF THAT STUFF
THAT'S IN THAT ROOM
OUT OF HERE, YOU KNOW.
I SEE.
OTHER THAN THAT,
I'VE BEEN DOING OK.
YOU KNOW, I WAS
IN SCHOOL,
BUT THEN MY SISTER
GOT SICK.
I HAD TO GET OUT
OF SCHOOL
SO I COULD TAKE
CARE OF HER,
AND THEN SHE
PASSED AWAY
ABOUT TWO MONTHS
AFTER I GOT
OUT OF SCHOOL,
AND I WAS THINKING
ABOUT GOING BACK
TO SCHOOL,
BUT I NEED A JOB,
THOUGH.
LIKE I SAY,
I BEEN PUTTING
IN APPLICATIONS,
BUT A LOT OF THEM,
THEY'RE SAYING,
"WELL"--BECAUSE
I BE TRUTHFUL.
I LET THEM KNOW
THAT I'M ON PAROLE,
AND I ALWAYS
PUT YOUR NAME
AND NUMBER DOWN,
SO I SAY, "YOU CAN
CONTACT HIM."
A LOT OF THEM SAY,
"WELL, WE'LL
CALL YOU."
THEN A LOT OF THEM
SAY, "WE CAN'T
HELP YOU
BECAUSE WE CAN'T
HAVE NO FELONIES,"
YOU KNOW WHAT
I'M SAYING?
WHAT DO YOU THINK WOULD
BE HELPFUL FOR YOU?
RIGHT NOW?
RIGHT NOW.
UH, THAT PROGRAM
THAT YOU GUYS WAS
TALKING ABOUT,
THAT TRAINING
PROGRAM.
SOME TIME
OF JOB TRAINING PROGRAM.
YEAH. YEAH.
THAT WOULD BE
THE BEST THING
RIGHT NOW, YOU KNOW,
BECAUSE, LIKE I SAY,
I GOT MY MOTHER,
SHE'S HELPING ME
OUT WITH THE RENT
AND MY BILLS
AND STUFF RIGHT NOW,
AND THEN MY NIECES
AND NEPHEWS,
MY SISTER'S KIDS,
BUT LIKE I SAY,
I WANT TO BE
INDEPENDENT
ON MY OWN.
I DON'T WANT HELP.
I WANT TO DO IT
MYSELF.
HELLO, UM, NATE.
THIS IS
CAMELLIA McCLENDON.
IT'S URGENT THAT
YOU GIVE ME A CALL
AS SOON AS POSSIBLE.
YOU KNOW, ARTHUR
COMES OVER HERE
AND VISITS ARVANI,
AND THEM WHEN
HE COMES,
HE DOESN'T WANT
TO LEAVE.
THE MAN JUST MESSED
UP MY ELECTRONICS.
THEN HE THREATENED
TO BUST DOWN
MY WINDOWS.
YOU NEED TO DO
SOMETHING WITH HIM.
PUT HIS ... IN JAIL
OR DO SOMETHING.
HE'S SITTING
UP THERE TRYING
TO BUST OUT
PEOPLE'S
HOUSE WINDOWS.
PLEASE DO SOMETHING
ABOUT ARTHUR HAYES.
Voice mail:
END OF MESSAGE.
MY NEXT CONTACT WITH HIM,
I KNOW FOR SURE
I'M GONNA PUT HIM IN JAIL.
HE'S NOT SUPPOSED
TO HAVE ANY CONTACT WITH HER.
WE TRIED TO WORK
SOME STUFF OUT
TO WHERE HE WOULD
GO OVER TO SEE HER--
NOT HER BUT SEE HIS SON,
OR WE CAN FIGURE OUT
SOME OTHER WAY
FOR SOMEBODY TO PICK
THE CHILD UP
AND GET THE CHILD TO HIM,
BUT HE, UM, DOESN'T
HAVE ANYWHERE TO STAY,
AND WE DON'T WANT TO
TAKE A KID TO A SHELTER.
"WELL, LET'S GO SEE
YOUR DAD AT THE SHELTER."
YOU KNOW, THAT'S KIND
OF FOUL, YOU KNOW,
SO I TOLD HIM TO STAY
AWAY FROM HER,
AND WE'LL WORK
THE BUGS OUT
AS FAR AS VISITING
HIS CHILD,
BUT I MADE A REFERRAL
FOR A PROGRAM
WHEN HE WAS
AT 5 MONTHS OUT.
HE HAS 5 MONTHS LEFT.
THIS IS, LIKE, THIS
PAST MONTH,
AND EVERY PROGRAM
THAT I REFERRED HIM TO
SAID, "WE CAN'T TAKE HIM
BECAUSE HE ONLY HAS--
HE HAS LESS THAN 9 MONTHS
ON SUPERVISION LEFT,"
AND YOU HAVE TO HAVE
9 MONTHS OR MORE
IN ORDER FOR THEM
TO TAKE YOU.
HE'S CAUGHT BETWEEN A ROCK
AND A HARD PLACE RIGHT NOW.
I TALKED TO HIM SPECIFICALLY
ABOUT WHAT IS HE GONNA DO--
"WHAT ARE YOU GONNA DO
WHEN YOU'RE OFF PAPER?
WHERE ARE YOU GONNA GO?
HOW ARE YOU GONNA MAKE IT?"
SO HE'S LIKE, "I DON'T KNOW.
I'M TRYING TO GET ALL
THE HELP I CAN GET NOW,"
BUT HIS ADDICTION
OVERRIDES EVERYTHING.
HELLO. HOW YOU DOING?
CAMELLIA HERE?
Camellia: YEAH.
HE HIT ME,
BUT I KIND OF DID
SOMETHING, TOO,
THOUGH.
I WAS CRYING
ON THE WAY
OVER THERE
BECAUSE I KNEW
THAT HE WAS TRYING
TO HIT A LICK
INSTEAD OF TRYING
TO GET SOMETHING
FOR MY SON'S
BIRTHDAY,
AND IT WAS JUST
A BAD TRIP
THE WHOLE WAY.
IN SEPTEMBER,
HE HAD ALSO TOOK
THE KID'S
SCHOOL CLOTHES,
YOU KNOW.
IT'S JUST THINGS
LIKE THAT.
HE EVEN TOOK OFF
IN MY CAR
WITH THE KID
IN THE CAR
AND TOOK AND SOLD
A BAG OF THE KID'S
SCHOOL CLOTHES.
YOU KNOW, IT'S--
I KNOW IT'S HARD,
BUT, YOU KNOW, I'M
A ADDICT, TOO,
BUT I WORK.
IT'S NOT
WHAT YOU DO.
IT'S HOW YOU DO IT.
I MEAN...
WELL, TAKING
FROM YOUR FAMILY,
I JUST CAN'T
UNDERSTAND THAT.
SO WHAT YOU GONNA DO
WHEN HE'S DONE
WITH EVERYTHING--
COURT, PROBATION,
PAROLE--
WHAT ARE YOU
GONNA DO THEN?
BECAUSE HE'S GONNA
TRY TO COME OVER
AND SEE YOU,
AND WHAT'S
YOUR PLAN?
I WANT HIM TO GO
ON HIS MERRY WAY.
IT'S NOT HEALTHY,
FOR ME,
AND IT'S NOT
HEALTHY FOR HIM
BECAUSE IF SOMEBODY
MAKES YOU THAT UPSET
TO EVEN GO THERE,
THEN YOU DON'T NEED
TO BE WITH THEM.
YOU KNOW,
IT'S CRAZY.
Roberts, voice-over:
I'VE HEARD HER TALKING
ABOUT HIM CREEPING
OVER TO THE HOUSE
BUT NOT TO THAT EXTENT.
I KNEW HE WAS
COMING OVER HERE.
ARTHUR WOULD DO ANYTHING
TO GET IN THERE.
WHEN HE ON THAT CRACK,
HE KIND OF--YEAH.
HE ON THAT CRACK,
HE KIND OF STUPID.
THAT CRACK COCAINE,
HE GETS OUT HERE
AND HAS NOWHERE ELSE
TO GO,
AND THEY USE THAT
"I'M THE BABY DADDY"
AS A TOOL, AS A TRICK,
YOU KNOW.
"LET ME IN.
I WANT TO SEE MY KID."
AND IT'S NOT
ABOUT THE KIDS.
JUST LIKE SHE'S
SAYING ON HER
SON'S BIRTHDAY,
INSTEAD OF THEM
TRYING TO GET
SOMETHING FOR THE SON,
HE'S TRYING TO
STEAL STUFF.
YOU KNOW, HE'S
STILL TRYING TO
FEED HIS ADDICTION.
HI, LOIS.
THIS IS MARQUITA SCOTT.
I'M A P.O.,
AND I'M CALLING
IN REFERENCE
TO RICHARD CAMPBELL.
IS HE STILL EMPLOYED?
OK. SO THE LAST TIME
HE CALLED WAS...
OK. AND THE LAST DAY
HE WORKED WAS 9/24?
OK. WELL, THANK YOU
SO MUCH.
APPRECIATE YOU.
OK. BYE-BYE.
HMM.
SO HE'S NO LONGER WORKING.
THIS IS A GARAGE
THAT WAS MADE
INTO A--
A LIVING QUARTERS.
THAT'S WHERE RICHARD
DECIDED HE THAT
WANTED TO MOVE TO.
HEY. HOW YOU DOING?
I'M DOING FINE.
HI. IS RICHARD
AROUND?
NOPE.
WHEN'S THE LAST TIME
YOU SEEN HIM?
WELL, HE CALLED ME--
THE LAST TIME WAS
LAST MONTH.
LAST MONTH?
YEAH.
OK. DO YOU HAVE
ANY IDEA WHERE
HE MIGHT BE?
NO.
WHEN YOU SAW HIM,
WAS HE HANGING OUT
DOWNTOWN?
IS THAT HIS
USUAL HANGOUT?
UM, NO. MY FAMILY'S
SEEN HIM DOWNTOWN.
YOUR FAMILY DID?
YEAH.
OH, OK. HOW LONG
AGO WAS THAT?
THAT WAS LAST MONTH.
IT WAS? HOW ARE
YOU DOING?
I'M DOING FINE.
HOW MANY MONTHS
ARE YOU?
I'M GOING
ON 3 MONTHS.
3 MONTHS. SO WHAT
ABOUT RICHARD?
YOU JUST WAITING
TILL HE GETS CLEAN?
YOU WANT HIM BACK?
MM-HMM.
YOU DO?
UH-HUH.
OK.
EVEN THOUGH HE'S
A PAIN IN THE BUTT.
A PAIN, HUH?
HA HA HA!
WELL, IF YOU
SEE HIM,
WOULD YOU PLEASE
LET HIM KNOW THAT
I CAME BY.
I WANT TO SEE HIM
GET CLEAN.
WELL, I KNOW
WHEN HE CALLS ME.
I CAN TELL
IF HE'S MESSED UP.
HE'S BEEN CLEAN
FOR 30 DAYS,
FOR A WHOLE MONTH.
HE'S BEEN CLEAN.
OH. HE HAS?
HOW DO YOU
KNOW THAT?
BECAUSE MY RELATIVES
SAID THAT HE'S NOT--
HE'S NOT HANGING OUT
WITH THE DRUGS NO MORE.
OH, HE'S NOT?
AND SO WHEN'S
THE LAST TIME HE
CONTACTED YOU?
LAST TIME HE
CONTACTED ME WAS
JUST BEFORE
LAST MONTH ENDED.
OK.
GREAT.
HE IS GOING TO
THE AA MEETINGS,
SO THAT IS
ONE BLESSING.
THAT IS--THAT'S
A GOOD THING.
HE NEEDS TO COME IN
AND TELL ME THAT.
NEXT TIME YOU
TALK TO HIM,
YOU HAVE HIM COME
SEE ME,
YOU HAVE HIM
CALL ME.
OK. TAKE CARE.
I THINK SHE KNOWS
WHERE HE'S AT.
I JUST CONTINUED
TO ASK HER QUESTIONS,
AND THEN SHE CONTINUED
TO GIVE ME JUST A LITTLE
BIT MORE INFORMATION.
"HE'S STAYING CLEAN."
HOW DOES SHE KNOW THAT?
THROUGH HER SISTER. HMM. OK.
JUST...SEEMED AS IF
SHE KNEW MORE THAN
SHE WAS SUPPOSED TO
FOR NOT HAVING CONTACT
WITH HIM FOR A MONTH.
SO HE'S PROBABLY CONVINCED
HER NOT TO SAY ANYTHING
"OR ELSE I'LL GO TO JAIL,
AND I REALLY WANT TO BE
HERE WITH YOU AND THE BABIES."
YADA, YADA, YADA.
HEY!
WHAT UP?
COME TALK TO ME.
WHO YOU WANT? ME?
BOTH OF YOU.
HAVE Y'ALL SEEN
RICHARD?
RICHARD CAMPBELL.
LIGHT SKIN.
NOPE.
YOU AIN'T SEE HIM?
IF YOU SEE RICHARD...
TELL HIM TO
CALL YOU?
TELL HIM TO CALL ME,
AND TELL HIM TO
COME TO GROUP.
HA HA! OK.
YOU GOT TO PUT
THE WORD OUT
BECAUSE A LOT OF TIMES
WHAT HAPPENS IS THAT
THEY'LL GET CLEAN AND SOBER,
AND THEN THEY'LL SAY,
"YOU KNOW WHAT?
WHEN I WAS OUT THERE,
"I SAW THIS GUY,
AND HE TALKED TO ME,
"AND HE TOLD ME,
"AND THAT GOT ME
TO THINKING.
"NOW I REALLY, REALLY
DO NEED TO TURN MYSELF IN,
AND THAT'S THE REASON
WHY I'M HERE TODAY."
SO YOU NEVER KNOW WHAT'S
GONNA TURN SOMEBODY'S HEAD
OR, YOU KNOW, MAKE SOMEBODY
DO SOMETHING DIFFERENT.
I DON'T THINK THAT
WE'RE GONNA SEE HIM
BECAUSE I THINK THAT HE IS,
UH, AT THE GIRL'S HOUSE.
OK. THANKS.
HEY.
HOW YOU DOING?
GOOD. HOW ARE YOU?
UH, ALL RIGHT.
LOOKING DIFFERENT.
CUT ALL YOUR HAIR
OFF, HUH?
YEAH.
OK.
WHEN NATE ARRESTED ME,
I WAS ACTUALLY
GLAD TO SEE HIM.
I TOLD HIM IT WAS
STRESSING ME OUT.
WHAT TOOK YOU
SO LONG, YOU KNOW?
AND I FELT LIKE
I GOT RESCUED
INSTEAD OF ARRESTED.
YOU KNOW,
THE RESPONSIBILITY
IS YOURS TO REPORT.
IS YOURS TO ADHERE
TO THE CONDITIONS
OF YOUR PAROLE,
AND I--IT'S NOT
OUR JOB TO COME
AND GET YOU
OFF THE STREET
AND SAY, "OK.
COME ON.
LET'S GO TO JAIL."
WHERE DO YOU GO
FROM HERE?
I DON'T--
UM...
I'M NOT REALLY SURE.
I MEAN...
PROBABLY I GO
TO IN-PATIENT,
GO TO IN-PATIENT.
SO WHAT ABOUT
JERUSALEM?
WHO? MY FIANCÉE?
MM-HMM.
AND THE BABIES?
WELL, YOU KNOW,
THAT'S--THAT'S--
I'VE BEEN THINKING
ABOUT THAT, TOO.
IT'S LIKE, YOU KNOW,
I'VE HAD SOME
RELATIONSHIPS
IN THE PAST,
AND I RAN OUT
ON THOSE, TOO.
IT WAS LIKE I DIDN'T
FOLLOW THROUGH
ON THAT EITHER.
NOW THAT YOU HAVE
TO GO BACK TO
IN-PATIENT TREATMENT,
WHAT DOES THAT
MEAN FOR YOU?
I CAN COMPLETE
THE PROGRAM.
IT'S WHAT I DO
AFTER THAT THAT
MAKES THE DIFFERENCE
FOR ME
IN MY EXPERIENCE,
YOU KNOW WHAT I MEAN?
IN-PATIENT--NOT A PROBLEM.
I CAN DO IT
AND GRADUATE.
AGAIN, THAT'S JUST
NOT THE ISSUE.
IT'S NOT THE PROBLEM.
IT'S WHAT I DO
AFTER I GRADUATE.
AND WHAT DO YOU NEED
FOR ME TO HELP YOU
TO BE
SUCCESSFUL NOW?
HMM.
THE SOONER YOU CAN
GET ME IN THAT PROGRAM,
THE BETTER.
I MEAN, AND THE REST
IS UP TO ME.
WHAT MORE CAN YOU DO?
YOU CAN HELP ME GET
INTO A PROGRAM,
BUT THE REST OF IT
IS UP TO ME.
DID SOME REMODELING
INSIDE, HUH?
YEAH. YEAH.
THEY'VE BEEN
REMODELING.
Roberts: HE'S WORKING
INDEPENDENTLY
UNTIL SOMETHING SOLID
COMES UP
WHERE HE CAN GET
A PAYCHECK STUB
AND SHOW--
I MEAN, IF I COME
OVER HERE OR GO
WHEREVER HE'S AT,
HE HAS NO PROBLEM
SHOWING ME WHAT KIND
OF WORK HE'S DOING,
LETTING ME KNOW THAT
THE PEOPLE ARE PAYING HIM
TO HAUL THIS STUFF AWAY.
TO ME, THAT'S CREDIBLE.
I MEAN, WHEN YOU TRY
TO MAINTAIN A HOUSEHOLD,
YOU KNOW WHAT I MEAN,
YOU TRY TO FEED KIDS,
AND YOU'RE EXPECTING
A KID TO COMING,
YOU GOT TO--SOMETIMES,
YOU HAVE TO DO WHAT
YOU GOT TO DO
JUST TO MAINTAIN,
JUST TO MAINTAIN IN LIFE--
LIFE IN GENERAL,
OR YOU TURN
TO ILLEGAL MEANS,
AND THEN ILLEGAL MEANS LEAD
BACK TO THE PENITENTIARY.
AND SO I DON'T WANT
NONE OF THAT.
West, voice-over:
A LOT OF TIMES WHEN
YOU'RE INSIDE,
YOU'RE SITTING ON YOUR BUNK,
AND YOU'RE THINKING,
LIKE, "MAN, I CAN'T WAIT
TO GET THERE,"
YOU KNOW WHAT I MEAN,
"I CAN'T WAIT,"
BUT THEN WHEN YOU DO GET THERE
AND THE REALITY HIT,
THE DREAM THAT YOU HAVE
MADE IN YOUR MIND,
HOW YOU SEEN IT,
THAT'S A DREAM,
YOU KNOW WHAT I MEAN?
IT'S REALLY A DREAM,
AND UNTIL YOU GET OUT,
UNTIL YOU GET--
UNTIL YOU HAVE TO
MAKE THOSE DECISIONS,
UNTIL YOU HAVE TO--UNTIL YOU
HAVE TO GO TO THE GROCERY STORE
AND WATCH $150, $200
GO THROUGH YOUR HANDS,
AND YOU WALK OUT THE STORE,
YOU GOT MAYBE 3 GROCERY BAGS,
OH, MAN, YOU BE LIKE,
"OH, MY GOODNESS!
"WHERE DID THE MONEY--
WHERE DID ALL THE MONEY GO
THAT I SAID I WAS GONNA HAVE
WHEN I WAS INSIDE?"
GROWING UP, IT WAS ALWAYS
ABOUT FAST MONEY, EASY MONEY,
THE FASTEST WAY
I CAN GET IT.
I FIND MORE ENJOYMENT
WHEN I SIT DOWN
AND EAT WITH MY FAMILY,
AND I KNOW THAT, "OK.
I GOT OUT AND WORKED
HARD FOR THIS MONEY
SO THAT THEY COULD EAT."
THAT INVOKES A WHOLE
DIFFERENT PRIDE IN YOURSELF
THAT, YOU KNOW WHAT I MEAN,
I DIDN'T HAVE TO GO
AND DO SOMETHING ILLEGAL
TO GET IT,
OR I DIDN'T HAVE TO GO
TELL A STEWARD,
"HEY, CAN I GET YOU
TO POP THE FREEZER
"SO WE CAN GET THE MEAT OUT
SO THAT WE CAN COOK
FOR 1,000 PEOPLE?"
YOU KNOW WHAT I MEAN?
I FIND ENJOYMENT
GETTING UP
AND GOING TO THE BATHROOM
BY MYSELF,
OPENING MY REFRIGERATOR
PICKING AND CHOOSING
WHAT I WANT TO EAT.
BATHROOM.
THAT'S FUNNY.
I ENJOY THAT,
YOU KNOW WHAT I MEAN,
BECAUSE THOSE ARE
THE SMALL AMENITIES
THAT'S TOOKEN AWAY
FROM YOU WHEN YOU INSIDE.
ROCK AND ROLL.
THAT'S THE WORK DAY FOR ME.
Roberts: I'M JUST REAL
GLAD TO WORK WITH GUYS
LIKE RANDY STRAIGHT UP.
IT MAKES ME PROUD
TO BE IN A POSITION
TO SEE A PERSON DO WELL,
TO ASSIST THEM ANYWAY I CAN,
WHETHER THAT'S A CONVERSATION
OR HELPING WITH JOB SEARCH
OR WHATEVER,
BUT MY GOAL IS TO SEE
HIM DO WELL,
IS TO SEE HIM--
IS TO SUPPORT HIM
IN ANYTHING HE CHOOSES
TO DO,
SO IT'S A GOOD DAY TODAY,
REAL GOOD DAY TODAY.
Richard: WHEN I WAS
TOLD TODAY THAT YOU GUYS
WERE COMING BY AGAIN,
THE FIRST THING
I THOUGHT OF WAS
THE FIRST TIME
THAT WE HAD FILMED,
AND IT WAS THE DAY
I WAS GETTING OUT
OF PRISON,
AND I REMEMBER SOMETHING
MY DAD SAID THAT DAY.
HE SAID HE MISSED
MY FRIENDSHIP,
AND, YOU KNOW, HE'S
PASSED AWAY NOW,
AND ACTUALLY MAY HAVE
BEEN THE CATALYST
FOR ME TO FINALLY MAKE
THAT, YOU KNOW,
ADDITIONAL CHANGE
THAT I NEEDED TO MAKE.
PEOPLE DON'T REALIZE--
WHEN THEY'RE
IN THEIR ADDICTION
OR WHEN THEY'RE
IN THEIR CRIMINALITY,
THEY DON'T REALIZE
THAT LIFE STILL MOVES ON
AND THINGS ARE
STILL HAPPENING,
AND THEN THAT'S WHEN
YOU REALIZE, "HEY."
IT'S LIKE YOUR STANDING
AT THE WINDOW NOW.
YOU'RE WATCHING LIFE
GO ON,
AND IT'S JUST REAL TOUGH
TO SEE, YOU KNOW, PLACES
WHERE YOU SHOULD BE IN LIFE
AND NOT HAVING ACCESS
TO THEM BECAUSE
OF CHOICES YOU MADE.
IF I DO THE BEST
I CAN,
CHANCES ARE THAT
THINGS ARE GONNA
TURN OUT FAIRLY GOOD.
FAIRLY GOOD.
SO I'M LOOKING
FORWARD TO SEEING--
SEEING HOW MY KIDS
ARE GONNA TURN OUT
IF I DO
THE BEST I CAN.
Gamble: CALVIN...
CALVIN HARPER.
HE'S BACK IN PRISON,
AND I DON'T--
I STILL DON'T KNOW
EXACTLY HOW MUCH TIME
THEY'RE GONNA GIVE
HIM ON THOSE
BURGLARY CHARGES.
THE REASON WHY
CALVIN WAS SO TOUGH
TO ME IS BECAUSE
HE WAS DOING
EVERYTHING HE
NEEDED TO DO.
HE'S SHOWING UP
AT GROUPS,
HE WAS REPORTING
WHEN HE'S
SUPPOSED TO.
YOU DO A HOME VISIT,
HE'S AT HIS HOUSE,
BUT WHAT HE WASN'T
DOING WAS REFRAINING
FROM THE CRIMINAL
STUFF.
HE WAS GOING OUT
AND APPLYING
FOR JOBS
AND STEALING STUFF
WHILE HE WAS THERE
PICKING UP
APPLICATIONS.
LET'S TALK ABOUT
WHAT HAPPENED, MAN.
YOU HAD A JOB,
AND THINGS KIND OF
WERE ASSEMBLING OUT
REAL NICE, SO...
I KIND OF STARTED
MESSING WITH DRUGS.
AND THAT WAS SHORTLY
AFTER YOU BECAME EMPLOYED?
ACTUALLY,
IT STARTED--
IT REALLY STARTED--
I JUST DIDN'T
SAY IT STARTED--
WHEN I LOST
MY SISTER.
IT STARTED
RIGHT AFTER THAT.
SO PRIOR TO YOUR
SISTER'S DEATH,
YOU WEREN'T
DOING NOTHING?
I USED TO SHOOT DOPE
20 YEARS AGO,
AND ONE MORNING,
I WOKE UP,
AND I DECIDED
I DIDN'T WANT TO
DO IT NO MORE,
AND I DIDN'T DO IT,
AND I HAVEN'T SHOT
DOPE SINCE.
THESE ARE WAY OLD.
OLD TRACKS. YEAH.
THEY AIN'T NOTHING
TO DO--
YOU KNOW, I LEFT
IT ALONE,
AND I'VE NEVER HAD--
YOU KNOW, I NEVER
HAD TO GO
THROUGH 12-STEP
OR NONE OF THAT.
MAYBE I SHOULD HAVE.
MAYBE I COULD HAVE
BEEN ABLE TO
OPEN UP
AND TALK ABOUT IT.
GRIEF COMES AND GOES,
BUT IT'S A PART
OF OUR LIVES,
SO EVERY TIME
SOMEBODY DIE
YOU GET LOADED?
YOU DON'T HAVE TO
DO THAT, YOU KNOW.
YOU KNOW,
I KIND OF USED
THAT AS AN EXCUSE.
THAT WAS
A WONDERFUL EXCUSE,
PERFECT OPPORTUNITY.
YEAH, BUT STILL,
THAT'S NOT REALLY--
YOU USED BECAUSE YOU
WANTED TO USE.
IN THE BACK
OF MY MIND,
I PROBABLY ALWAYS
WANTED TO USE,
AND IT CAME FORWARD
WITH THAT,
WHICH--BUT NOW ON
I'M NOT GONNA LET
THAT HAPPEN AGAIN.
ARE YOU ABLE
TO IDENTIFY SOME CHANGE
IN YOUR ATTITUDE
FROM THE FIRST TIME
YOU DID TIME,
GETTING OUT ON PAROLE
TILL TODAY?
IT'S A LOT OF CHANGE
AS FAR AS
ME TRUSTING
A P.O., YES.
OK. DOES THAT MAKE
A DIFFERENCE, THOUGH,
BEING ABLE TO TRUST
A P.O.?
IT MAKES A LOT
OF DIFFERENCE.
IF I DIDN'T HAVE
YOU GUYS,
AND IF I'D HAVE HAD
SOMEBODY ELSE--
YOU'D BE GONE.
I'D BE GONE,
BUT I STILL--
I PROBABLY
WOULD STILL BE
IN DENIAL
BECAUSE I WOULD
NEVER HAVE OPENED
UP TO THEM PERIOD.
I FEEL BETTER
BECAUSE YOU GUYS
ARE GONNA HELP ME
GET THE HELP
THAT I NEED.
IT MIGHT BE
A LITTLE
PRISON TIME,
WHICH I UNDERSTAND
BECAUSE THAT'S
WHAT I DID,
BUT YOU GUYS IS
GONNA WHEN I GET OUT
STILL HELP ME GET
WHAT I NEED
BECAUSE I DO
NEED HELP.
OK. OK.
THAT'S COOL.
WELL...
SAY HELLO.
STOP, STOP,
STOP, STOP, STOP.
SHUT THAT CURTAIN.
WHAT'S GOING ON?
THE DOG IS GOING NUTS.
GONNA BREAK
THAT GLASS.
ARE YOU POINTING
THAT AT ME?
HEY, BUDDY.
NO. IT'S THE SOUND.
WHEN THEY DO,
LIKE, TV SHOWS,
THEY DO A CAMERA
AND, UM...
West: I'M TELLING YOU,
THEY'VE JUST BEEN
HAVING ME RUNNING.
I JUST BE GOING
BACKWARD AND FORWARDS,
BACK AND FORTH.
DOCTOR APPOINTMENT HERE.
OUT HERE TO GET MEDICATION.
OUT THIS WAY,
BACK THIS WAY TO
COME GET SOME DOG FOOD.
BACK THAT WAY TO GO GET
SOME BABY FOOD.
THEN AT THE SAME TIME,
YOU KNOW,
TRYING TO BE DOWN,
TRYING TO GET
SOME EMPLOYMENT
BECAUSE, YOU KNOW
WHAT I MEAN,
I GOT DENTAL PLANS,
MEDICAL PLANS,
AND THINGS LIKE THAT
THAT I NEED TO TRY TO--
THAT I NEED TO TRY
TO ESTABLISH
BECAUSE THE FAMILY
ARE STARTING TO GROW.
Roberts: HOW HAS
DIFFICULTIT BEEN
MAKING THE ADJUSTMENT
DOING ALL THAT TIME,
THEN BEING OUT ONE YEAR.
THAT'S 16 IN--
16 IN AND ONE OUT.
WE GET IN THERE
AND GET ON THIS FANTASY
THAT WE GONNA COME OUT HERE,
AND WE GONNA GET
THAT $15 JOB,
AND WE GONNA BE WORKING.
THAT $15 JOB JUST DON'T
COME LIKE THAT
BECAUSE ONCE YOU GET
ON THAT APPLICATION,
THEY ASK YOU,
"HAVE YOU EVER
BEEN CONVICTED?
EXPLAIN."
ONCE YOU GET THERE,
ONCE YOU GET TO THAT POINT,
I MEAN, SOMETIMES,
YOU DON'T EVEN MAKE IT--
YOU DON'T EVEN MAKE IT
AT THE DOOR.
IT STARTS WORKING ON YOU.
IT STARTS MAKING YOU
QUESTION YOURSELF,
LIKE, "MAN, WHAT AM I
DOING WRONG?"
I THOUGHT THIS
WAS GONNA BE EASY.
ALL THE STRENGTH
THAT I HAD
WHEN I WAS BACK
THE OTHER WAY.
I HAD THAT.
I WAS HERCULES NOW,
BUT NOW WHEN
I GET OUT HERE,
I SEE THAT, MAN,
I'M PEE-WEE HERMAN.
NOT ONLY DID HE
HAVE TO DO THAT TIME,
BUT IT STILL
AFFECTS HIM.
YOU KNOW, HE PAID
THE CONSEQUENCES,
AND NOW HE'S STILL
PAYING FOR IT,
SO THAT'S ANOTHER THING
ON TOP OF THE--
IF YOU THINK YOU
JUST HAVE TO DO
THE TIME AND THAT'S IT,
NO, IT'S GONNA AFFECT YOU
FOR LONG BEYOND THAT,
SO I WISH MORE PEOPLE
WOULD BE A LITTLE BIT
MORE OPEN-MINDED.
SO WHAT HAVE
TAPPED INTO
TO KEEP YOU
FROM FALLING VICTIM
TO THOSE MISTAKES,
POOR DECISIONS?
WELL, WHAT I TAPPED INTO--
THE MOST IMPORTANT THING
THAT I DONE TAPPED INTO
IS MY FAMILY
BECAUSE I KNOW
THEY GET ENJOYMENT
WHEN THEY SEE ME
EVERY DAY
BECAUSE NOW THEY DON'T
HAVE TO SEE ME ON THE WEEKEND.
THEY DON'T HAVE TO MAKE
THE 45-MINUTE TRIP
TO COME SEE ME
IN A DEPRESSING SITUATION
WHERE THEY GET DEPRESSED
TO EVEN COME IN THERE.
THEY CAME TO ME
WHEN I WAS UNABLE
TO COME TO THEM,
SO NOW THAT I'M ABLE
THEY AIN'T GOT TO GET UP.
I'M ON MY WAY,
NO PROBLEM.
"WHERE YOU AT?"
I MEAN, THEY COULD BE
IN TIMBUKTU,
I'M FIXING TO GO
TO THE 76,
PUT MY GAS IN,
AND I'M ON MY WAY
TO TIMBUKTU,
AND SO, YOU KNOW WHAT I MEAN,
THAT'S WHAT IT IS WITH ME.
THAT'S HOW IT'S BEEN FOR ME.
Gamble: YOU GOT 8 MONTHS
LEFT ON SUPERVISION,
BUT THEN YOU ALSO GOT
THE REST OF YOUR LIFE.
WE CAN DO THE WHOLE
PAROLE THING,
AND YOU DON'T SHOW UP,
YOU GET A WARRANT
AND GO TO JAIL.
WE BEEN DOING THAT.
I CALL THAT THE DANCE,
AND YOU AND I BEEN
DOING THAT DANCE,
YOU KNOW,
BUT HERE WE ARE,
SAME QUESTION.
WHAT IS IT GONNA TAKE
FOR YOU?
THE MISTAKE I MADE
WAS I STARTED
LETTING COMPLICATIONS
INTERFERE WITH WHAT
I WAS TRYING TO DO
WITH MY OWN LIFE.
I GOT INVOLVED
IN A RELATIONSHIP
THAT, UH--
LORD HAVE MERCY--
WAS REALLY
DETRIMENTAL TO ME.
YOU KNOW, IN
THE AFRICAN AMERICAN
PROGRAM,
THEY MENTIONED
SOMETHING ABOUT AS
FAR AS MINORITIES
IF WE HAVE ANY
MENTAL HEALTH ISSUES
LIKE DEPRESSION,
FOR EXAMPLE.
I'VE BEEN DIAGNOSED
WITH DEPRESSION
MYSELF,
AND, YOU KNOW,
I DIDN'T WANT TO
ADMIT TO MYSELF.
I WAS LIKE,
I DON'T HAVE
ANY PROBLEMS.
WELL, OBVIOUSLY,
I DID IF I KEEP
DOING INSANE THINGS,
AND I FINALLY
ADMITTED TO MYSELF
THAT, HEY, MAYBE
I SHOULD SO
SOMETHING ABOUT IT,
SO I GOT AHOLD
OF CASCADIA,
AND I HAVE A DOCTOR
THERE NOW.
AS A MATTER OF FACT,
I'M GONNA GIVE HIM
A CALL LATER ON TODAY
AND SEE ABOUT
SEEING HIM SOMETIME
THIS WEEK OR NEXT
JUST TO SIT DOWN
AND RAP TO THE MAN.
IF YOU DON'T PICK UP
A NEW CRIME BEFORE
THE 8 MONTHS IS DONE
AND YOU STAY CLEAN
AND SOBER, GREAT.
IF YOU DON'T PICK UP
A NEW CRIME
AND YOU KEEP USING,
THEN WE CONTINUE
TO DO THAT DANCE, YOU KNOW,
UNTIL THE 8 MONTHS
IS UP,
AND THEN--AND THEN
FROM THAT POINT,
YOU'RE KIND OF
ON YOUR OWN,
BUT HOPEFULLY,
YOU KNOW, BY THE TIME
THIS 8 MONTHS IS DONE,
YOU DO HAVE SOME STABILITY.
LIKE LAST NIGHT
FOR EXAMPLE,
WHEN I GOT DONE
WORKING,
UM, THE FIRST THING
I DID WAS GO BACK
TO SALVATION ARMY.
THAT'S MY HOME
FOR NOW.
SO AS SOON AS I GOT
MY LITTLE BITTY
PAYCHECK,
I WENT
STRAIGHT HOME-
HA HA HA--
AND DID MY LAUNDRY,
ATE,
AND JUST TOOK
IT EASY,
JUST DID
THE RIGHT THING,
YOU KNOW,
AND, UH, YOU KNOW
THEY SAY
NOTHING BREEDS
SUCCESS LIKE
SUCCESS,
SO YESTERDAY
WAS A SUCCESSFUL
DAY FOR ME.
YOU'RE OFF IN 8 MONTHS.
Gamble, voice-over:
SO WE HOPE THAT RICHARD COMES
IN HERE A MONTH FROM NOW,
AND HE'S WORKING,
AND HE'S GOT EMPLOYMENT,
AND, YOU KNOW, THAT'S THE HOPE,
BUT IF HE DOESN'T
AND HE STARTS USING,
THEN WE DO THAT DANCE AGAIN,
AND THAT'S WHERE IT IS
RIGHT NOW.
ALL RIGHT, RICHARD.
THANK YOU.